Today, I'm going to teach you how to get
your first double body weight squat.
Now, some of you may already have done
your first double body weight squat, and
some of you weigh higher than that. Uh
and that's great, but the principles
that I'm going to be teaching you, they
apply to you as well.
Now, what's the significance of a double
body weight squat?
Well,
firstly, it's the story that I like to
tell a lot of people that I work with. I
achieved my first double body weight
squat when I was 90 kg.
I squatted four plates aside, which is
180 kg. And that took me 10 years to
achieve.
Okay? So, 10 years to achieve. Some of
you at home might be thinking, "That's
hopeless." Um
>> [sighs]
>> I don't know if it's hopeless or not.
But, hopeless in Australian, it means
terrible.
And uh I think that
you know, with the knowledge that I have
now, it is not that good. I've been able
to achieve
a lot better results with all of my
clients. I've got my daughter for
example,
does reps on double body weight. She did
a top single of 105 kg weighing 52 kg
when she was 14 years old.
And she didn't take steroids. So, some
people, whenever you talk about strength
standards, their minds resort straight
to that. So, no, this is not a feat of
strength that needs
any special enhancements. It's something
that if you're serious about your
training, you kind of should be able to
do. Now, yeah, so what else about the
significance of this
this milestone, double body weight? So,
for me, it was 180 kg at 90 kg body
weight. And the reason why it is
significant is because a lot of people
come to me. I'm not the best in the
world, but I'm pretty strong. My best
squat is 400 kg with reps.
Uh raw, I never really tested it, but
the best that I did was 320 kg, which is
705 lb.
With sleeves and a pause. That was
paused. That's because I wasn't really
testing my my max. So, I was like doing
it as an accessory exercise. And front
squat, 260 kg, which is six of these
blue plates aside. So, I'm a pretty good
squatter. I will admit it. And people
come up to me and say things like,
you know, if they've met me for the
first time, it's like, you know, how did
you do it? How did you get so strong?
And I look at it, it's like,
"What does strong mean to you?" So, for
me, I've trained Thor Björnsson, the
world's strongest man. And when you work
with someone like that, whose best squat
is 460 kg,
and best deadlift is 510 kg, you kind of
look at the weights that I'm doing, and
it's like, "Ah, maybe it's not so strong
after all." So, perspective really
matters, and that's a question that I
often ask. It's like, people say to me,
"How did you get so strong?" And it's
like, "Well, what do you consider
strong?" So, my first question is things
like, you know, how much can you lift?
And I've had occasions where people say
to me, "I've squatted 180 kg." And I'm
like,
"Okay, how long did it take you to do
that?" And they'll say things like, you
know, three years or four years or five
years, or whatever it is that's less
than 10. So, for me, it was 10 years at
90 kg body weight.
And I say to them, "Did you know that
after 10 years of training, that's when
I first achieved my first 180 kg squat
at 90 kg body weight?" So, some of you
at home, and put it in the comments
section below, I'm sure that we're going
to get a bunch of comments saying,
"I was lighter than you when I got my
first 180, and I got it in way less than
10 years." And it's like,
"That's correct. I'm 44 years old, and
I've achieved these numbers,
you know, after putting more than 20
years of hard training in."
Right? Of obsession. Right? So, that's
how I got there. Like, I'm not uh
genetically gifted in any way. I just
didn't want to be good at anything else.
Literally, it's all I did. I did squat
every day programs. I did every
specialization program you can think of.
And after, you know, a long period of
time, I got pretty good at it.
So, that's the first bit of perspective
that I like to teach people so that they
look at me and my squat, and they're
like, "Oh, well, if I if you're saying
to me that I achieved a better number
than you in a shorter time than you,
the reason why I'm teaching people this
is you have to understand what your
potential is if you put the time and
effort and consistency into it. Right?
You have to understand what's possible.
But either way, I'm going to tell you
the next bit of context and the
significance of a double body weight
squat after I do my next set.
>> [sighs]
>> The next thing that I consider to be
significant in in why I have that number
in my head of a double body weight
squat, I'm an educator. I host seminars,
and I've been doing that on average, I
do about 10 seminars a year, and I've
been doing that for the last 10 years.
So, I've done a lot of seminars in my
time.
And quite often, that's one of the
questions that I ask. A lot of the
people that attend my seminars are
personal trainers, and
they come to me to learn how to become
better personal trainers so they can,
you know, obviously be stronger, but
also improve their business.
And they ask me questions like, you
know, how long What does it take to be
able to achieve that level of strength?
And I'll ask a question like, "Well,
what is your strength level of
strength?" And quite often, I've learned
that uh one of my first questions is,
"Hands up in the audience, who can do a
double body weight squat?" Uh 10 years
ago, when I first started asking that
question, I would get My seminars are
usually anywhere between 30 to 50 people
in the classroom.
And I would get maybe one put person put
their hand up, maybe two.
Recently, I've been getting a lot more.
Like, in my last seminar in Melbourne,
there was 35 people, and I think I had
maybe eight people put their hand up.
So, it's improving. There's no doubt
about it.
But, I think that this is a strength
standard that is achievable by, like I
said, my daughter did it when she was 14
years old. Not on steroids, no no
genetic gifts or anything like that. She
just understood the process. She Well,
because she had me coaching her, of
course. So, I trained her through the
process. And that's what I want to talk
to you guys about today. So, firstly,
I'm going to do my first warm-up sets,
which is going to be my top set of the
day is going to be a stiletto squat. If
you've been following me for long
enough, my stiletto squat is an elevated
heel squat, high bar,
and the objective of this is to build
quadriceps. And the way that I
differentiate with my different squats
is I have quad dominant squat patterns,
which is where,
if you can see through here, I elevate
the heels, and what I want is maximum
knee bend. And and an upright torso. So,
that's the objective of that is to
target my quadriceps. And that's what
I'm starting my session with before I
then do a hip dominant squat, which is
where
I can shift the heavier load. So, that's
the sequence of my program right now.
There's lots of different programming
examples.
And I'm going to talk about what it
takes and what you can do today to
achieve your first double body weight
squat in a much shorter amount of time
than me.
And beyond.
[__]
The balance on that was
wrong.
It was just wrong.
I felt like I didn't use the right
muscles. I have to try that again.
I mean, it wasn't so bad. It wasn't.
But, last week I did that for three
reps.
And it was a little bit of a shaky three
reps. So, the pause wasn't there. So, I
thought if it's there, I want to go for
three
good squats with good pauses.
>> [sighs]
>> I'm going to try that again.
Hope you don't mind.
Hope you don't mind. Let's see it. Let's
just say no, not here. I'll see you.
I'll I'll I'll
Yeah.
I got to be
>> [snorts]
>> It's a different brace. It's ribs down.
Bah. I think that I was
muscles were turned off. I can't explain
which ones they were. But, that was
definitely
wrong headspace.
Five minutes? Yeah, bro. Give me five
minutes, and we're going to go again.
All right.
Come on. Let's do this better.
Let's do this better.
>> [music]
>> Let's go.
>> [sighs]
>> I was thinking, "Do I show off now and
do the fourth rep?"
I was I was very close to doing that,
but then I thought, "No.
This is my warm-up.
It's a pretty extensive warm-up, let me
tell you, but it's just the program that
I'm on currently is
starting with that, and
making sure it's
hard set, but it's still submaximal. And
I'm only doing one set. So, that puts me
in a nice position now
to
work up to something decent. I'm going
to re-warm my low bar up now.
So, that was the first part of the
session.
And that's me demonstrating, well, I'm
about 97 kg at the moment, so that's
more than double body weight squats with
a high bar
and a
heavily
elevated heel.
Stiletto squat or cyclist squat, call it
what you like, or a high heel elevated
squat
with a slight pause.
It wasn't a long pause. It's just to
break momentum.
The idea is to get rid of the bounce.
Which I'm not going to be doing on the
next exercise. So, I'm going to be using
a bounce.
And I'm going to be using, you know, to
control bounce.
And I'm just going to be using the
techniques
that
when I say squat double body weight as
your first milestone, you want to be
using the strongest squat pattern
available to you.
And what is that? That's the low bar
squat
without any of these elevations.
What a different
What a different feeling that was.
That was just silly.
It was just silly. It was It was wrong
position and it threw me off.
Halfway through the movement, you saw me
my my brain switched off.
Which quite often happens.
When you know you did done something
wrong, it's like, "Ah." And then you go,
"Ah, it's wrong." And then you forget to
push and then it makes it even harder
again.
Anyhow.
My best on that when I was at the 300 kg
squat mark
was five reps on 220 on on 200 on that
weight.
Five reps.
>> [panting]
>> I've done 225 for two
and 220 for two.
>> [sighs]
>> I did 220 for two, 225 for two.
But I never got three. And they were
ugly, but whatever.
You know.
Comparing apples with apples
200 for five was around the time that I
did my 300.
>> [sighs]
>> So.
I don't think I had I don't feel as
strong as when I did it for five. I'm
sure I had the fourth rep there.
But not the fifth. Last week I did 200
kg
for 10 reps.
I haven't done anything heavy in a
while. So, the objective now is to
gradually introduce heavier weight. So,
200 for 10, you know, it sounds like,
"Oh, 200 for 10, get the calculator
out." You know, what's what's that
roughly equal to? 70%
and then you do the calculations, it's
like, "Therefore, your
one rep max must be this weight." It
doesn't work that way.
To get a heavy weight, you need to
practice the skill of lifting that heavy
weight. I've now refined my skill of
high rep work with my low bar.
And I haven't felt more than 200 kg on
my bar
in in some time.
I got chats, all good. So, that's
another part of going for a max is you
can't just go
for high rep work
and and
not explore the low rep work.
Which is another thing that a lot of
people do, such as myself. In my early
years, I would do a lot of rep work and
then all of a sudden out of nowhere I'd
be like, "Oh, I can do this weight for
10 reps or eight reps or whatever it
might be. I think it's a good idea to
test my max." It's like, well,
maxing out is a skill.
And you need practice of that skill.
And when I'm good at the skill of maxes,
I'm actually not very good at repping
200 for 10.
You know, now that's that's what I did
last week and there was more in the
tank. If I did
a a phase of low rep and heavy weight
work, I would I would get better at
doing my
low rep heavy weight work.
But my rep work would suffer. I would
lose that conditioning. Right? So, you
get good at whatever you practice. So,
therefore if you want to test your max
you got to peak. You got to
gradually [clears throat] introduce the
low reps
and the heavy loads. Now, that's
actually what I'm doing today.
I'm going to be gradually introducing my
low rep work. I'm considering going for
a top single and I don't know what
that'll be. In my head
I had the number 260. What's the time?
It's
12:15.
I've got 40 less than 45 minutes to do
this. I've got 35 minutes to do this.
And you got to eat. And well, that's why
it's not 45. I've got a client at 45
minutes.
And
>> [panting and sighs]
>> I've got to eat before that.
Let's see how we go. I'll try and warm
up quickly.
I mean, I'm warm. So, this is I'm going
to go red red red. We'll see how it
goes.
>> [sighs]
>> 70 kilos.
>> [music]
[music]
>> All right, we got it.
Now, I don't know if you heard the
little dialogue before we got in here
and Musty said, "How do you think the
260's going to feel?" And I was like,
"Ah, let's not say 260 because
I don't want to over promise and under
deliver."
So, you know, that's what I came in here
thinking that 260 was the number that
was realistic today
for my first reintroduction to heavy
singles.
And I was right.
That was kind of the limit. Maybe I had
265.
I mean
gun to my head, I probably had 265, but
there's no gun to my head, you know.
I don't think anyone's ever had to squat
under those circumstances, you know.
That was Yeah, that was correct. Now
high RPE, I don't know, 9.5 RPE.
Let's go with that. 9.5 RPE and that's
my introduction to heavy singles. So, if
you do the maths, last week I did 200
for 10 and you do the percentages, I
don't know what the percentages say
about those numbers. I don't believe
that they're entirely accurate. But I
would say that it would be more than the
prediction would be more than 260 kg.
Someone in the comment section help me
out.
But there's a difference between saying
you can do 260 and actually doing it,
putting that weight on your back. So,
the biggest thing that I felt now
that I forgot about because last time I
squatted 260, like I squatted 2 300 kg
raw not too long ago.
And I remember the process is when I got
to those weights, it wasn't feeling so
overwhelming to unrack it. Today
that was probably the hardest part was
kind of the the feeling of that weight
on my back.
And that's part of the skill. Now, I am
pretty good at that skill still even
though I haven't done it in a while,
I've still got a good understanding of
taking my time with precisely walking
that weight out and getting into the
right position. But that's a huge part
of the skill component. It's not just
the going down and up phase, it's
setting setting it up on your back,
bracing when you unrack the weight so it
doesn't shock your body. So, sometimes
that's what happens. It's like if you
haven't felt that weight in a long time
or or ever at all. People going for a PR
or a PB you have to pick up that weight
and it shocks you and that you're
defeated immediately from that moment
you've unracked the weight. It's like,
"Oh, this is the weight that I'm not
familiar with." And you've already
failed. And quite often that's what I
see, the psychology of lifting these
heavy weights.
So.
Here's uh my consensus. I knew it would
be challenging and feel heavy today, but
I think that next week I'll be able to
go heavier. And uh watch this space.
Money where my mouth is. Let's see what
happens. I'm pretty sure that I'll be
able to keep pushing that up. That's the
first exposure that I've had to heavy
singles. And that is a part of
maxing out. It's learning the skill of
what it feels like to hold a heavy
weight. Same with deadlifts. Same
applies with pretty much all the all of
the lifts. The moment you feel it in
your hands for a bench press. The moment
you feel it in your hands for a
deadlift. Sometimes people miss the
weight because it's like, "Oh, that is a
completely foreign feeling." So,
therefore practicing
not one rep maxes, they're called heavy
singles, not one rep maxes. So, heavy
singles with that are submaximal with
repetitions in reserve. I don't want to
say those repetitions in reserve. I
don't think I'd have had a double on
that. Maybe next week I can.
But you know what I mean.
Anyway, uh that's my session now. The
objective of today was to just feel the
top weight.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I've got a client that I have to train
in 15 minutes and I've got to have lunch
in that time as well. So, I'm not going
to continue with accessories on perfect
circumstances, I would probably do some
back down work and then maybe some
accessories. Maybe I'll do that as a
second session. For now, I'm going to go
eat and I'm going to come back with some
more knowledge.
Okay.
Now, it's time for homework.
I'm going to I'm speaking pretty loudly
because I thought I was projecting my
voice too, but I can just speak normally
because I've got a microphone on
that I totally forgot about. All right.
Time for some homework. So, now we've
done the practical and now it's time for
the theory. I'm going to teach you some
training principles that are going to
last you
to the two times body weight squat in a
lot shorter time period than it took me.
I told you it took 10 years, but it
doesn't have to. That's because I didn't
have any guidance and I didn't know what
I was doing. But now I know what I'm
doing and I'm going to be able to
achieve it for you in a much shorter
time. How much time?
If you saw my last week's video on bench
pressing three plates, I talked about
body weight and I say the heavier you
are, the easier it is to get this goal.
Well, now it's kind of the opposite.
When it comes to the pound-for-pound
game,
excuse the airplane, lifting a weight
relative to your body weight, the
lighter the lifter, the easier. So, it's
easy to do double body weight if you
weigh 50 kg compared to someone doing
100 kg someone who weighed 100 kg.
Hafthor Björnsson weighs 200 kg. So, for
him to squat double body weight, it
means he has to squat 400 kg.
It's not just as easy for the super
heavyweight lifter it is as it is for
the lighter lifter. So, the advantage
goes to the lighter lifter. Either way,
double body weight is a goal that I
believe everyone should be able to
achieve.
Now,
most people aren't 200 kg, so that's of
course a freak
uh example, but they do exist. The
heavier you are, the harder that
becomes. But most people that I'm
talking to are going to be a lot less
than 200 kg body weight and this double
body weight goal matters. Now, let's go
step by step on the order of priorities
when it comes to your long-term success
and achieving this goal of double body
weight. First things first, lifting
technique. Lifting technique for the
squat, I'll always teach that two main
squats are going to be a high bar squat
and a low bar squat. You can include a
front squat.
You can completely exclude front squat
to achieve this goal. You don't need to
front squat to build your strength in a
squat. You don't need to front squat to
maximize your muscle mass in your lower
body. I recommend if you want a front
squat because you like it, good answer.
If you
are a weightlifter or a crossfitter and
you need to perform a clean and jerk or
a snatch, then a front squat is a very
good exercise that you should be
including. But if you're a bodybuilder
or a powerlifter or just a recreational
lifter that loves squatting, you don't
ever need to front squat unless of
course you like to front squat. Now, I
would love for Mosty, my editor, to put
my 260 kg
front squat here because I love front
squatting, but it did not contribute to
me being able to be a great powerlifter.
I could have squatted the same amount as
a powerlifter without ever front
squatting in my life. So, some of you
hate the sound of that. Some of you have
an emotional attachment to a front
squat. I love a front squat. You're not
a bad person if you do, but it's not
going to help you get your two times
body weight squat. Anyway, high bar
squat, low bar squat, which one's
better? The low bar squat is what you
should test your maximum squat on.
That's no doubt about it, the easiest
way to squat the heaviest amount of
weight. However,
you guys like the way that I say
however. A few people have mentioned
that in the comments. Anyway, I didn't
realize it until you guys wrote
that I say that. However,
the high bar squat, in my opinion, is a
superior squat for building strength and
building leg muscle.
So, that's right. I used to teach that
the low bar squat is better for building
strength, but it's not. It's better for
shifting heavy load and
displaying your strength, but the best
way to build strength is actually a high
bar squat. You just can't shift as much
load with it. So, what's my
recommendation is to test your double
body weight squat or test your squat max
with a low bar squat. The most efficient
way of squatting a max, low bar squat.
But make sure you're incorporating your
high bar squat. And it's not a matter of
which one do we do, one or the other. We
use both at various times in our squat
programming.
Now, if you want to know the lifting
technique, which is the highest priority
when it comes to your long-term
progression, there's a link here to a
very in-depth squat tutorial on high bar
technique and low bar technique. Watch
that. That's going to take you the
furthest out of out of everything.
Airplane. Next highest priority when it
comes to your long-term success,
if you've been watching me for long
enough, you're going to have heard me
say this over and over again and I'm not
going to apologize for the repetition.
Why? Because I want to emphasize its
importance and that is loading and how
to structure your loading and how much
weight you should be lifting or how hard
you should be training.
And if you've been following me, you'll
know, but if you haven't been following
me, now I'm going to introduce it to
you. It's my four-week model for
periodizing effort. What does that mean?
I typically like to use four-weekly
programs and I know some of you like six
weeks, eight weeks and even up to
12-week programs. Fine.
I like four-weekly programs and the
reason why people like longer than that
is because they believe too much
variation is not good for your
progression and I agree except the
variations that I use are very minor
variations and they have a logical
progression or carryover to the next
phase. So, there's nothing wrong with
four-week programs. Trust me, it works
for me and it works for a lot of the
high-level lifters that I've worked with
in the world and it worked for Hafthor
Björnsson to achieve a 510 kg deadlift.
So, don't try and say that four weeks
doesn't work. It does if you're doing
them correctly. Now, my strategy for my
four-weekly programs are
week one is your conservative week. What
does conservative mean? It means
starting with roughly a session average
of about seven RPE. What does seven RPE
mean? It roughly means you've got three
reps in reserve.
Of course, it's not perfect. Humans are
very poor at predicting how many reps in
reserve we have, but that's totally
fine. It's just an estimate. So, week
one RP seven, week two RP eight, week
three RP nine and week four
is where we kind of send it. It's kind
of as close to an RP 10 as possible and
the objective is to not take it to fail.
When we're talking about free weight
exercises, a lot of the times people
debate whether we should train to fail
or not and my answer is you should fail
sometimes, but with the right exercise.
When it comes to free weight movements
like a barbell squat, deadlift, bench
press, I would suggest that if you never
failed ever,
you would probably do well. You don't
need to fail on these movements. In
fact, that's where you're risking
injury.
And I'm not saying failing is bad, but
if you are going to fail, fail on the
right exercises such as machines, such
as dumbbells, such as high rep range
exercises. When you're doing low rep
range work and training to fail, this is
where the risk of injury increases.
When it's high rep work with machines
and dumbbells and things like that,
you're not going to injure yourself.
It's probably totally fine and training
to fail sometimes is probably a good
idea. That's the best way to maximize
the main mechanism of muscle
hypertrophy, which is mechanical
tension.
So, how do we achieve mechanical
tension? By taking that movement as
close to fail as possible.
The thing is there's a difference
between training for muscle building and
training for strength. A lot of the
times when you train to the point that
bodybuilders want to train to, which is
failure,
that slowing down of the bar speed can
negatively impact your long-term
strength progression. So, when it comes
to strength, especially barbell
strength, it is a skill that you want to
develop and you don't want to get a huge
amount of practice of grinding out reps
time and time again.
So, therefore, recapping on that,
probably don't ever need to train to
fail on your barbell movements. If you
do every now and then, we're all
culprits of it. It's fine to push
yourselves, but don't do it too
frequently. Don't make a habit of it.
When it comes to machines and training
for hypertrophy, yes, good idea to take
movements to failure more frequently.
But for now, follow that four-weekly
process, which is week one RP seven on
average, week two RP eight on average,
week three RP nine, week four, send it.
Next highest priority is how much work
we do. So, we just spoke about technique
being highest priority, how hard you
work being the next highest priority, so
intensity
or load.
Week
Third highest priority is how much work.
So, volume. Now, volume can be split up
into
total sets per week.
And
there's many ways of looking at how we
accumulate these total sets.
So, when it comes to building muscle,
the recommendation is usually, and it's
mutually agreed upon by a lot of the
best researchers, that 10 to 20 total
sets per body part per week is optimal
for maximizing your hypertrophy.
However, when it comes to strength, the
recommendation is slightly different.
There is a research paper, I believe
it's 2014 by Dr. Rhea and colleagues,
where they studied the amount of total
sets per movement pattern per week being
optimal anywhere between
six to 12 sets per movement pattern per
week. Now, six is quite low, especially
when it comes to squats. I would say
that six range is for different
exercises that are
you know, like more demanding as well as
working with highly elite lifters. Six
total sets for things like deadlifts and
super super super strong squatters per
week six total sets. That's about right,
but most people aren't at that level. I
would say the sweet spot for total sets
per you know movement pattern for squat
pattern, I would say was it is anywhere
between 8 to 12 sets per week.
Now, here's the next thing. How many
sets do we split that over? Some people
like to squat once per week.
A lot of the research points towards
higher frequency than once per week
being optimal. So, what is more than
once per week? I would say two times per
week is my sweet spot. If your objective
is to get the best squat possible, two
times per week is my recommendation.
And you would split up that 8 to 12
total sets over those two sessions. So,
what does that mean? It means four to
six total sets in one day and that's it.
Doing more than that on a big movement
like a squat, like I wouldn't do six
movements on a six sets of a squat
because I'm quite advanced. I'm quite
strong. Some people aren't as strong and
that's where you can afford to
accumulate a few more sets than that.
So, I would say four to six for me, you
know, I'm looking at four sets tops for
my big squat movements, but up to six is
also totally fine. Two times per week.
So, there's your frequency.
I don't know if you want to give it
away, but I know you have a secret magic
field for
getting really really strong in squats.
Do you call it super accumulation? Mhm.
That's
I do want to give it I want to give
everything away. You know that? The
funny thing is when I give all my free
stuff away, a lot of people think that
there's very little value in it because
I'm giving it away so freely. There is
no one doing this. I'll tell you now, I
give everything. I've been doing this
for over 20 years and at a high level as
well. And I give you all the stuff that
I give you is gold. So, so Moster was
talking about squat specialization
programs that I give. Now, that's
different. Um if you are totally serious
about this and want the best results
possible, I follow a lot of programs
where you know, I've done the Bulgarian
style of
squatting every day. It's not really
Bulgarian. The Bulgarian method is based
on weightlifting where they train their
clean jerks and snatches daily to a max.
And a lot of people say the Bulgarian
method for squats
Bulgarians didn't squat every day to
that degree. The modified version of
that is squatting daily.
Uh the person that I learned that from
was from a fellow by the name of John
Bros. And that was squatting not just
daily, but two times a day where you'd
alternate between back squats on one day
and front squats on the next. Back
squat, front squat, back squat, front
squat, back squat, front squat every
single day twice per day, but just once
on Sunday. And that's not because that
one day of rest or one session of rest
is good for you. It's because he wants
to give people a life.
So, that's 13 total squat sessions per
week. That is something that I've tried
and I got pretty good results, but not
for a long period of time and my body
wouldn't allow it now. Um it wouldn't
allow it now because one I'm quite
strong and two I'm 44 years old with you
know
close to 20 years. I've been training
for more than 20 years, but close to 20
years at a high level. I would say
closer to about 15 years at a high
level. My joints have accumulated a lot
of total tonnage and in that time, I
don't have any injuries, but I know that
my body is not as forgiving. If I do a
big squat session,
uh it takes a few days before my body is
able to perform at a high level again.
And for me, two times per week is
optimal. So, that's why I say for
optimal frequency, two times per week,
but
if you ever wanted to take it seriously
and you're kind of like intermediate
levels,
then I can suggest some squat
specialization programs that maybe I'll
do on another day cuz that's a new
discussion for a different time and
that's largely
uh to thank for my success in squatting
in my early years. It took me from
intermediate to advanced in a very short
time. However, a lot of people don't
want to put in that much time and don't
want to spend 7 days per week squatting
every single day. It is a commitment and
that's not for everybody. But it was for
me because I'm a fanatic. But you don't
need to do that. My daughter doesn't do
that and she didn't do that to achieve a
double body weight squat because that's
not what you need to do. Two times per
week is all you need and you're going to
be able to achieve a double body weight
squat and more in a much shorter time
than it took me. It's the long game that
we need to consider. And once you
achieve your double body weight squat,
that's not it. You don't stop. You
haven't reached the Mount Everest or
whatever the peak you're thinking of.
That's not enough. You want to keep on
going, set a new goal and continue to
follow this process. Now, last but not
least is how to set up your programming
over the long term because it's not just
about um you know, squat two times per
week and that's it. We need to think
about how often to max out and how often
to do high rep work and how often to do
anywhere in between. And there is a
process. The fact is if you want to get
good at one rep maxes, you can't just do
one rep maxes all year round.
Man, this is airplane day today.
Everyone wants to fly.
Uh you can't just do one rep maxes all
year round. It's too demanding and you
can't accumulate the volume that you
need to achieve the best results
possible with your squats.
One reps one rep maxes, you need to do
probably you know, like 10 to 20 total
sets to get the right amount of volume
to elicit some type of
meaningful muscle growth. So, that's not
really feasible when you're considering
the load that's possible with your one
rep max or with your one rep range. So,
therefore, my recommendation is not to
test your max so frequently. How often
do I recommend testing your max?
I say
three times a year is kind of the way
that I like to train and the way that I
like to program for my non-competitive
lifters. So, if you're training for
competition, you peak in strength, you
know, two to three times a year. A lot
of the times high level competitive
athletes compete more than that. But
I'll tell you now, competition doesn't
make you stronger. It makes you better
at competing and the experience and what
you learn about yourself is definitely
beneficial for your long-term strength.
However, competition day is hugely
fatiguing on your body. So, the week
after a big competition, you are
objectively exhausted, weaker and you
need to kind of like restart that
process again. So, competing
if you have the option of you know,
playing the long game and and thinking
about you know, being the best
powerlifter you can be, I would say in
your early years two to three times per
year to compete, I think is pretty much
the sweet spot. Uh so that you can get
competition experience, but more than
that is probably not good for getting
stronger.
Same with if you weren't to compete, my
recommendation for how often you should
max out, I say three times a year. So,
what does that equate to? It equates to
roughly splitting up your training into
16-week blocks. 16-week blocks with
four-week mesocycle. So, 16 weeks is the
macrocycle. So, macro means the long
term. So, from the start of your program
to the date of peaking, that's your
macrocycle. I say 16-week macrocycles
are pretty good. That's pretty much how
I like to set myself up when I'm not
competing and how I like to set up most
of my
clients. That's yes, I'm a coach and I
coach a lot of people and if you want to
be coached by me, then
there's a link in the description
wherever that's that is. You'll figure
that out. Uh but most of the people that
I work with, I recommend 16-week phases
for them macrocycles and four-week
programs or four-week mesocycles within
that. Which means the way that I like to
structure my mesocycles is essentially
there's many ways of doing it. One way
is completely linear so you could do
something like the first four weeks on
10s.
The next four weeks on eights. The next
four weeks on fives. So, there's 12
weeks done and then the last four weeks
on peaking. So, that's where you would
either do you know, like singles for
four weeks, which is what I'm doing. I'm
going to go heavy single and then back
down work. I know that's not what I did
today, but I will be doing that moving
forward. That was my first week of
singles. It was submaximal and then next
week I go heavier. So, this is me
teaching my body. I'm giving myself four
weeks of singles where the first week is
submaximal.
It's not a true max even though they
looked pretty slow and I didn't have a
huge amount in reserve. However, that's
kind of what happens when you haven't
lifted heavy weight in a long period of
time. Your body needs to condition
itself to that feeling of loading with
heavy weight on your spine.
So, that was me on week one and the
objective is to be able to go heavier
every single week. So, that's how I
would peak. High reps, moderate reps,
strength phase, slightly lower reps
again and then peak. So, that's a pretty
typical traditional or linear style of
periodization and I've done a lot of
presentations on periodization, which
I'll continue to do, but that's how I
would set up my programming so that you
can test your max every 16 weeks. I
don't think that's unreasonable to be
able to do. Now, how many of these
phases should you do before you're able
to do a double body weight squat?
You know,
everyone's different. Everyone learns at
a different rate. Everyone you know,
there's there's hyper responders to
programs and there's people that take a
little bit longer. If you're fueling
your body perform for performance, you
have your nutrition down pat. What I
like to do is roughly 2 g of protein per
body weight in kilograms or four Hang on
a second. 1 lb
1 g of protein per pound of body weight
or 2 g per kilogram of body weight.
If you're eating roughly that and eating
at a maintenance calories or even a
slight surplus, that's where you're
going to get your best strength gains.
If you're eating in a deficit, you could
probably still get stronger when you're
a beginner, but as you get more and more
advanced, eating in a deficit is great
for fat loss, but it's not the best for
muscle building and it's not the best
for strength gain.
So,
if your nutrition is down pat, you're
eating at at least a maintenance level
or in a slight surplus, how long would
it take before you can reasonably
achieve a double body weight squat? If
you're following the techniques that I
teach you and you're following those
guidelines, I would say you should be
able to do that in the first year of
your training.
Like I said, it took me 10 years to do,
but I'm able to achieve these numbers
with people like double body weight
squat in a year or two from day one of
your training till double body weight
squat and I if you follow these
guidelines, you'll be able to do it,
too. So, I hope you enjoyed that video.
If there's anything that you disagree
with,
pull me up. Let me know in the comment
section. This is how I like to train. If
you got upset about my front squat
comment, put that in the comment section
as well. We can discuss. Trust me, I'm
good at front squats. I love front
squats, but you don't need to do it
unless you are a weightlifter or unless
you enjoy doing it. Anyway, hope you
enjoyed that session.
I'm going to see you the next time I see
you.
That was a good one. Yeah, I thought so,
too.